In today's Signal of the Day,
we have a look at
an important problem in room acoustics
entitled Can One Hear the Shape of a Room?
Let us first investigate how sound
propagates in a room between a sender, or
a loud speaker, s, and
the receiver, or a microphone, r.
Which is illustrated in
the following figure.
The first sound to reach
the microphone corresponds to
the direct transmission
path depicted in orange.
But together with this direct transmission
echos from the walls also arrive at
the microphone depicted in purple here.
So walls act essentially as mirrors.
Every time a sound hits the wall,
part of the sound is reflected in
such a way that the incident's
angle equals the reflection angle.
These angles are defined with respect
to the normal of the walls ni and
nj, respectively.
Part of the signal is also absorbed by
the wall which depends on the type of
material the wall is made of.
The energy absorbed by the wall
is transformed into heat,
which increases the wall's
temperature very slightly.
This phenomenon is generally
referred to as diffuse reflection.
These echoes act as virtual
sources of the original source.
For example, here it's a virtual
source which corresponds to
the reflection with respect to
this wall and here is a second
virtual source corresponding
to the reflection given here.
Echos generate themselves,
new echos from other walls that
we call higher generation echos.
And this goes on and on until the energy
of the signal is fully absorbed.
The line in green represents, for
example, a second generation echo.
First echo here.
This point, second here.
And this corresponds to
a second order in each source,
until it reaches the microphone.
We can now look at the simulation of how
sound propagates inside a complex room.
This cool video was produced by one of
our lab members, Dick Schroeder, and
illustrates how a pulse emitted
at a loud speaker propagates in
room until all the pulse
energy is dissipated
From our explanation, it seems that
sounds propagation is a fairly complex
phenomenon involving the super position
of a signal and its different echoes,
such that the derivation of
a model might not be very simple.
Nevertheless, in room acoustics,
sound levels are low such that the Linear
model is a good approximation.
From what we have just learned in class,
a linear time invarying system is entirely
characterized by its impulse response.
By definition, the response of
the system to an impulse signal.
We introduce by analogy the concept
of a room impulse response.
So describes the audio channel between
the sender S and the receiver R.
So room impulse response simply sums
up the direct path transmission and
the subsequent attenuated echos.
Let us now look at different
room impulse responses.
For example,
the one of our lab conference room.
Here we plot, on the top, the first
second of the room impulse response.
And we also zoom in to the first
70 milliseconds at the bottom.
We observe that the early part of the room
impulse response contains more or
less isolated well pronounced peaks
that correspond to individual echos.
But non-flat fading,
diffusivity of reflections and
the diffraction all unite
in the latter part of
the room impulse response to create
noise like exponential decay.
Of course,
an equally important contribution is from
the fact that echoes get denser and
denser as time passes.
The rate of the decay varies
wildly between different rooms and
is linked to the so-called
reverberation time or P60.
Which is defined as a time for reflections
of a direct signal to decay by 60 DB.
It varies from around a second in
a speech-only lecture hall to about two
seconds for
a general purpose auditorium, to for
example, more than eight seconds in
the Notre Dame cathedral in Paris.
It is a very good idea to listen
to room impulse responses.
By doing that,
we can really appreciate the difference
between various acoustic spaces.
[SOUND] Let us
look at another room impulse response,
that of the Lausanne Cathedral.
Again, we plucked the first second of
the room impulse response on the top and
we also zoom in the first 70
milliseconds at the bottom.
Again, let's listen to it.
[SOUND].
Measured or
synthetic room impulse responses can be
used to recreate the acoustic
impression of the corresponding space.
If we convolve a room impulse response of
a cathedral with the sound sample measured
in a room without echo,
the resulting signal will sound as
if it was recorded in the cathedral.
This process is called auralization.
It is used, for
example, in virtual reality to create
realistically sounding virtual spaces.
Another application example is,
of course, in music production.
As you will hear,
even this simple convulation can
evoke correct mental imagery about
the space we are auralizing.
Consider the following sound sample.
>> Can one hear the shape of a room?
>> It does sound dry.
Now let's oralize it.
First, let's hear what
happens when we convolve this
dry sound with the impulse response
of our lab conference room.
>> Can one hear the shape of a room?
Now let's do all the auralization with
the cathedral's room impulse response.
>> Can one hear the shape of a room?
>> An important practical question is
how to measure room impulse responses.
As they are response to an impulse,
the first idea is to simply use
an impulsive source of sound and record
the room response with a microphone.
But, there are numerous
drawbacks to this simple idea.
Room impulse responses is
the response to an idealized post,
a direct delta function.
Realistic impulsive sources are only
approximations of the direct, and
usually not very good ones.
Even if we might think that popping
a balloon or firing a starter pistol
generates a very good impulse,
In reality, this is not true.
Repeatability is also an issue.
Popping different balloons
generates different sounds.
Another way of measuring a room impulse
response consists of playing a known
sound through the loudspeaker and
then deconvolve it in the spectral domain.
In the picture you see how we
measured the room impulse response of
the Lausanne Cathedral.
We placed a special loudspeaker,
a so-called omnidirectional loudspeaker in
the center of the picture and we played
actually what is known as a sine sweep,
which is sinusoid of increasing frequency.
It resembles a little bit of sounds
that backs in it when they actually do
the process of echo location.
But, let's not get too much
into the details here and
come back into our main
question of interest.
Can one hear the shape of the room?
The question is whether we can reconstruct
the shape of the room using only echos.
Consider the following
experimental set up.
We put some microphones into a room.
We would like to reconstruct the room's
shape from what the microphones record
when we clap our hands, that is from
the recorded impulse responses.
Room impulse responses contain
peaks that correspond to echoes and
echoes are muddled by image sources.
But if the room is not too complicated,
locations of image sources tell
us how the room looks like.
So we can rephrase the room
reconstruction problem into a problem of
localizing a certain
number of image sources.
At the next level of abstraction we
forget that they are image sources.
And we just attack a problem of localizing
multiple sources and meeting impulses.
In our lab we developed a theory for
reconstructing the shape of
a room from impulse responses and
we ran some experiments to test it.
The first round of experiments
was run in our conference room,
mentioned already multiple times.
So you see Schon in the left
part of the image and
you see the model of
the room at the bottom.
We built the wall out of tables so
we could move around the room and
change its geometry.
We then added some microphones and
loud speakers and we're ready to go.
Here are the results for
two different room configurations.
In both experiments,
all dimensions of the room were estimated
to high accuracy using five microphones.
For example, the height of the ceiling is
estimated within an error of only one or
two centimeters.
Encouraged by the success of this
experiment, we went straight for
the Major League.
We did experiments in
the Lausanne Cathedral.
Of course, we didn't really hope to
reconstruct the detailed geometry of
the cathedral.
That's because cathedrals with their
curved surfaces, domes, decorations and
columns are much more complicated than
the rooms we developed our algorithm for.
Nevertheless, we were able to reconstruct
the main dimensions of an alcove at
the side of the cathedral
with quite good accuracy.